They say Luis Miguel is the sun of Mexico.
His voice had soft dawns, bright days and sunsets
golden.
Today we are going to go through his vocal history as if
we followed the movement of the sun throughout life.
If his voice ever gave you goosebumps or
you felt identified with his lyrics,
stay.
Today I'm going to show you how his voice changed.
Because
and what we can learn from this change to sing better.
Before starting this journey,
subscribe, activate the bell and leave your
like.
This is a channel for those who have respect for the
artists.
You sing... You laugh... You fly with Lau Valencia.
The magic of getting started. With Lau Valencia
The magic is about to begin.
Dawn already controlled the sun.
With 11 years recording one plus one two lovers.
Luis Miguel already showed some exceptional clean tuning,
rhythmic security and clear emission for his age.
It wasn't just childlike charisma, it was real control.
Listen here:
(music)
Its clean attack and projection are clear and frontal.
Radiant morning.
Fire in the chest.
Between the ages of 14 and 16 on songs like Decídete,
his chest voice begins to firm up.
The highs are no longer an adventure,
are your home.
Youthful energy was the driving force,
but there was technique, there was support.
(music)
Here we perceive a firmer and more typical projection
brilliance in the vocals that will accompany him for decades.
Midday Full balance in the sky.
Between the 80s and 90s comes its golden period.
The unconditional one.
Entrégate.
I have everything except you.
Power and control at the service of emotion.
This is where his phrasing becomes much more mature.
(music)
Look, the vibrato control.
And how he doesn't push, he doesn't scream,
resonates.
(music)
In this other video we can hear the handling of your air
in long sentences and the frontal opening of the
vowels to maintain brightness.
Dreamy dynamic golden afternoon.
With the boleros of "Romance", "Second Romance",
etc. and his stage of Mexican music with the bikini.
The King.
If they let us, Luis Miguel does something that
many did not expect.
He refines his technique, becomes more elegant,
more aware of phrasing and color.
In boleros his vibrato becomes finer,
the slur is more connected and the use of melismas and
yacht ornaments typical of Mexican music,
but without excesses.
Something that will also accompany him to this day.
Technique put at the service of style.
I hear here the slur and the slower vibrato,
typical of the genre.
(music)
In the bikini, for example.
You can hear the change in color and ornamentation.
(music)
This makes him more masculine, more serious,
more dramatic, somewhat darker.
They are no longer those bright notes.
Bright sunset.
Today, at over 50 years old,
adapts tonalities, relies on choirs and optimizes
resources, but still shows off his phrasing,
your control and your timing.
It is not the same midday sun,
It is the sunset sun.
Intense, golden,
sage.
(music)
Notice here how the timbre became darker.
And how he manages the air so as not to force his voice.
(music)
He has nothing left to prove.
Luis Miguel is the sun,
so he gives himself the luxury of freeing himself.
The pleasure of playing.
(music)
Exercises.
We will call the first exercise How delicious.
Exercise one How.
We will make a resounding m with our mouths closed,
the lips, palate and tongue
relaxed.
We will choose a note within our spoken voice and do.
Mmmm.
If your lips itch, don't worry,
is that the exercise is well done because we do not want a
tight mouth.
Don't shout the sound, gone.
Just thinking that you are watching something that you really like.
Mmmm.
Where?
If the exercise is done well.
You'll feel it on your cheeks,
the nose and forehead.
What we call a mask.
So that?
This exercise serves to train the brightness of your voice
without tightening the throat, something that Luismi has been doing since
always.
Exercise two.
We will call this second exercise
the, the, the.
As.
First we will say the three spoken syllables:
the, the, the.
Then we'll add a big smile.
LA, LA, LA.
Now we will choose a comfortable note as before
in your spoken range.
LA LA LA
And now we'll add some Twang.
It may sound a little nasal to you.
Although it's not exactly that.
LA LA LA
nasal would be...
WORSE
There is a subtle difference.
Then we will repeat the same with the "E",
the "I", the "O" and the "U",
LA LA LA
THE THE THE
LI LI LI
IT IT IT
LU LU LU
What is this exercise for? To make your vowels sound better.
clear and bright.
Something very typical of Luis Miguel's style.
Exercise three The third exercise that I propose to you is
of resistance and control.
As?
First you are going to choose a phrase that you like,
such as Don't blame the sun that shines.
Say it with a single exhalation,
without breathing in the middle and without falling out at the end.
Do it as if you were telling a story.
Don't blame the sun for shining, don't blame the sun for shining.
Don't do it, don't blame the sun (breathe) that shines,
Don't blame the sun for shining.
So that?
This exercise helps us learn to feel the support in
the diaphragm and not let out more air than we need.
You can do this exercise with the phrase I gave you,
with your favorite phrase or with a Luismi lyric.
Just as the sun changes color throughout the day,
Our voice also changes throughout our lives.
Luis Miguel shows us that changes should not be
scare us.
You have to adapt, you have to shine differently,
but always with technique.
I am Valencia the singer, singing teacher,
announcer and vocal coach.
Leave me in the comments what artist would you like to see?
Let's analyze the next one? And if this vocal journey to
through the life of Luis Miguel you liked,
Leave me your like, subscribe and follow me on the
networks for further analysis and vocal tools.
See you on the next musical journey.
(music)
with Lau Valencia
the magic is about to begin